
#### Contents
- [[#Tech for Our Medium|Tech for Our Medium]]
- [[#Is it our time?|Is it our time?]]


---

## Tech for Our Medium

3D Previsualisation tools and techniques have, in the most part, been developed for 2D-screen-focused media like film, gaming and live AV.[^24]

Adapted and used in the right way, there may be a pathway for theatre makers to use this tech and be better armed for avoiding production pitfalls.

Recent studies have shown that more technical theatre practitioners find themselves increasingly shouldering the weight of extra technical jobs beyond their purview.[^25] If we systematically examine these and other 'pain points' in our modern process, and put them in informed context, we will begin to see a pathway to overcome this needless strain on our workers.

Theatre makers becoming more informed in this area (for example, by reading this report) could result in a higher perceived demand for bespoke software and tools being developed by vendors- and conversely, theatrical organisations who are early adopters could see themselves leveraging much-needed value in their assets and productions in a time where where resources are tight.

This, broadly, is the purpose of this study.


## Is it our time?

[Architecture](2.%20Architecture.md) is a great example of an industry taking advantage of spatial computing. 

One could imagine a similar scenario to present predicament, decades ago: Architecture professionals facing pressure from time, with antiquated tools (or non-specialised tools, or tools specialised for a different industry), which seeded demand for Architecture-focused digital tools, resulting in pressure on vendors to create them, resulting in a new product category[^26].

The early adoption of digital tools, exemplified with Architecture, could possibly have been because lead times to view anything closer to 'final product' in this field are considerably longer than most creative industries[^27].

And today, in the Theatre industry, a few cutting edge studios are providing these services to high end productions already, and develop bespoke tools.[^28] 

The case being made in this document, which will be kept up to date as this technology progresses, is that **the time is now** to accelerate **previsualisation** and **spatial computing,** into the standard practice of theatre production: in the spirit, of course, that we are better off having this ability as an option in our toolkit, than watching our colleagues in other industries reach new heights, establishing new standards and practices that **we are subject to**, that are non-ideal for our established art form and ways of working. 

Additionally, with nascent existing tools optimising for **high-end production**, it is wise to take notice- as these tools, proprietary though they are, are seeing heavy investment because they are proven to save time and resources. It is in the interest of the industry at large, for this space to have competitive, consumer-friendly tools, that are cross compatible with existing standards and practices. This is how we maximise value from adopting new technology, and solve, rather than exacerbate, existing pitfalls of duplicated work and unnecessary strain- all too common with advanced use of digital tools today.

Adoption of **previsualisation** industry-wide will be a long process, involving the cooperation of practitioners, key industry stakeholders, organisations, and vendors. If considerable efforts began today, tangible results would likely be returned within 5 years, and lasting change established within a decade. This would coordinate with accelerating technology trends: we will benefit from increased computation power in the coming years to achieve the results we want. 

This worldwide trend is guaranteed- whether it will be good for us, will be up to us.




[^24]: In the context of the Entertainment industry, that is. We explore [Film & Television](1.%20Film%20&%20Television.md), [Gaming](4.%20Gaming.md) and [Live Events](2c.%20Live%20Events.md) coming up. Previsualisation has long been in development and use in [Architecture](2.%20Architecture.md) and planning, as we will explore, as well as [product development](3.%20Fashion%20and%20Manufacturing.md) and sales, or in the [Defence Industry](Previsualization%20practices%20in%20the%20Defence%20Industry.md).

[^25]: [Optimising Visualisation Practices in Theatre production](OptimisingVisPractices-Metcalfe.pdf)

[^26]: Autodesk's AutoCAD debuted in 1982. https://www.shapr3d.com/history-of-cad/autodesk-and-autocad

[^27]: [Architecture's Embrace of Spatial and 3D](Architecture's%20Embrace%20of%20Spatial%20and%203D.md)

[^28]: Take a look at case studies concerning [Preevue](2015-present%20-%20Preevue.md) and [Virtual Stage](2025-01%20-%20Younite%20and%20Virtual%20Stage.md) respectively.