
#### Contents
- [[#The Ideal Scenario|The Ideal Scenario]]
- [[#Conclusion|Conclusion]]
	- [[#Conclusion#Using Production Visualisation Technology|Using Production Visualisation Technology]]
	- [[#Conclusion#'Previs' Uses In Industry|'Previs' Uses In Industry]]
		- [[#'Previs' Uses In Industry#Film & Television|Film & Television]]
		- [[#'Previs' Uses In Industry#Architecture|Architecture]]
		- [[#'Previs' Uses In Industry#Fashion and Manufacturing|Fashion and Manufacturing]]
		- [[#'Previs' Uses In Industry#Gaming|Gaming]]
		- [[#'Previs' Uses In Industry#Live Events|Live Events]]
		- [[#'Previs' Uses In Industry#Notable Tech innovations|Notable Tech innovations]]


---

## The Ideal Scenario

**Success** in this effort will unlock creatives' true potential earlier in the production process, 'unlocking time' ahead of traditional rehearsal and tech.  

To take an earlier example, a Director’s key ‘soft skills’ - guiding perception and focus - would **come back into play** if they were able to 'step into' their finished set, or see their actors in costume, earlier in time. 

- Practitioners would be able to work within a **digital twin** of a performance space, usable from anywhere, anytime, before any build is commissioned. 

- Remote or global workers would provide more meaningful contributions, a two-way street of conveyed nuance opening up online.

- Those who excel in spatial, collaborative settings would be set to thrive and lead, much earlier in the production process.

- Software and hardware platforms we use would be encouraged to converge, and become more cross-compatible with virtualized tools, to service the new market need.

- Smaller creatives and production companies would more easily pitch **big ideas**, securing buy-in from producers for projects that may have been overlooked.

- New software and platform vendors have the opportunity to offer game changing products, or establish new open ecosystems in theatre tech, for the first time since the OSC protocol.


**These tools have the potential to empower creatives like never before.**


## Conclusion

### Using Production Visualisation Technology

**What we can do right now** is facilitate the education of current trends for practitioners. Effective use of visualisation technology has been seen across film, gaming, live AV and beyond - and compelling case studies will shed light on how this tech is providing value for practitioners. 

This context awareness will enable you, the reader, to imagine how this could help you in your position -- and prospective vendors dropping in can plan their use in theatre moving forward, as capabilities grow. 

To reiterate, recent research shows[^25] that practitioners’ technical capabilities are growing, but the conventions, platforms and practices they follow are not keeping pace, **creating friction**. This suggests a need to formalise Production Visualisation duties, as with Lighting Design, likely taking the following two forms:

1. A new Production Visualiser role
2. Sharing these tasks across the team

It is likely that because needs of Visualisation will be highly flexible, either of these scenarios could take place at any scale of production.

For example, one production may need to visualise Set and Costume heavily - another Lighting, another would need advanced oversight over Props. 

These disciplines are already well specialised, so it is easy to see heavy involvement in use of this tech from almost every department - with a dedicated Production Visualiser (or team) of necessary to assist with file management, conversion, rendering, communication, sharing, or even advanced **digital twin** or **cue-to-cue** management.

Sound has no reason not to gain equal value here, with convolution or spatial audio technology able to simulate acoustic spaces ahead of physical access.

Ryan Metcalfe of Preevue[^25] has coined the term 'e-tech' to describe the integration and interaction of all traditional departments in a simulation of the final product, saving precious time in tech rehearsal.

The rest of this Overview will comprise of a review of spatial 'pre-vis' technology in other industries, and early innovations in our own. 

Let's examine current practices, project their evolution, and lay groundwork for industry coordination in the next decade - read in sequence, or find your own path through this digital report.



### 'Previs' Uses In Industry

While there are a few emerging signs of previs success in our own industry, let's first cast the net wide open so we can be educated to what possibilities are available. That is to say: With the mind to develop new practices of pre-vis in theatre, let's examine how it has been established in other creative industries.


#### Film & Television
Public sources show that the vast majority of 'previsualisation' use in Entertainment, and the development of tools for this purpose, has taken place in film & television.[^29][^30][^31]  
Read on:  [1. Film & Television](1.%20Film%20&%20Television.md)

#### Architecture
A similarly spatial industry like our own, the longer lead times in construction, and huge requirements for monitoring and safety, have lead to the early adoption of visualisation to plan and monitor construction.
Read on: [2. Architecture](2.%20Architecture.md)

#### Fashion and Manufacturing
We take a focused look on mass manufacturing of products and clothing. Can their use of spatial computing help us?
[3. Fashion and Manufacturing](3.%20Fashion%20and%20Manufacturing.md)

#### Gaming
Interactive Entertainment, including video games, has evolved rapid-iteration user testing to determine behaviours and reactions.
Read on: [4. Gaming](4.%20Gaming.md)

#### Live Events
Live Events shepherd mass-participation of pop fans, business influencers, or enthusiasts to one common takeaway and experience.
Read on: [5. Live Events](5.%20Live%20Events.md)

#### Notable Tech innovations
This chapter summarises the 'industry' findings and focuses on key innovations emerging directly from the Tech industry.
Read on: [The Tech Industry - What is New](The%20Tech%20Industry%20-%20What%20is%20New.md)


## Next Article: Section 2.1 - Film & Television [>](1.%20Film%20&%20Television.md)
Read on for a look at previsualisation in the film industry. [1. Film & Television](1.%20Film%20&%20Television.md)




---
*Article by [Benjamin Collins](Contribute%20your%20story%20or%20research.md#Benjamin%20Collins) - [Contribute your story or research](Contribute%20your%20story%20or%20research.md)*


[^25]: [Optimising Visualisation Practices in Theatre production](OptimisingVisPractices-Metcalfe.pdf)

[^29]: [3D Previsualization (Previs) Software for Innovative Studios - Perforce](https://www.perforce.com/blog/vcs/3d-previsualization-software)

[^30]: ['Previs Pro' Software](https://www.previspro.com)

[^31]: [Previsualization software - AutoDesk](https://www.autodesk.com/solutions/previsualization-software)