
#### Contents
- [[#Introduction|Introduction]]
- [[#1. Communication and Coordination|1. Communication and Coordination]]
- [[#2. Resource Scarcity|2. Resource Scarcity]]
- [[#3. Late-stage Integration|3. Late-stage Integration]]
- [[#4. Managing Complexity and Expectation|4. Managing Complexity and Expectation]]
- [[#5. Burnout|5. Burnout]]



---

## Introduction

The creation of theatre can be described as uniquely collaborative in the context of industry, reaching almost magical levels of craft, leaving behind-the-scenes practitioners and actors alike with a deep love for what they do.[^1] 

We have compared digital previsualisation practices for other industries, and theorised how the **spatial** and **live** nature of theatre could present a barrier when it comes to creating a **digital twin**, already revolutionising other sectors. 

Beyond this acknowledged complexity, it is worth keeping in mind the unique set of challenges theatre-makers face that cannot easily be replaced with technology:

- Perhaps no other art form asks audiences for such a profound **suspension of disbelief**, transporting audiences with disparate resources. The simplest prop and complex technology, working in symphony, are relied upon for spectacle and story.

- Few creative ventures operate with fewer **safety nets**; live dramatic performance is inherently risky, relying on consistent engagement and flawless execution, night after night.

- The sheer number of **potential points of failure** relative to budget, and the immense **cognitive load** of 'things to remember' for everyone involved, are exceptionally high.


**This is the level that all theatre production - and the production process - must achieve to be effective.** So, we can safely assume that it is never going to be easy, and overcoming impressive challenges is, really, the name of the game.

But which challenges will **always** be there - and which are needless process-related issues, that can be fixed?

We have identified 5 key pain points that will be used as a framework for improvement. They are listed below for clarity, where you can explore each in further detail.



## 1. Communication and Coordination 
Bottlenecks in data-sharing and time early on, mean that problems and conflicts at a later stage. Read more: [1. Communication & Coordination](3.%20Pain%20points%20in%20detail.md#1.%20Communication%20&%20Coordination)

## 2. Resource Scarcity 
Sometimes, you can't just throw resources at a problem. Recent world events have left a theatre industry needing to cut costs and work with less. Read more: [2. Resource Scarcity](3.%20Pain%20points%20in%20detail.md#2.%20Resource%20Scarcity%20&%20knock-on%20effects)

## 3. Late-stage Integration 
Last minute fixes can lead to compromises in vision and an unpleasant loss of perspective. Read more: [3. Late-stage Integration](3.%20Pain%20points%20in%20detail.md#3.%20Late-stage%20Integration)

## 4. Managing Complexity and Expectation
A great idea pitch can lead to ambitions varying ahead of delivery. Read more [4. Managing Complexity and Expectation](3.%20Pain%20points%20in%20detail.md#4.%20Managing%20Complexity%20and%20Expectation)

## 5. Burnout
Sheer effort can lead to compromises in health and wellbeing, which can affect production unexpectedly. Read more: [5. Burnout](3.%20Pain%20points%20in%20detail.md#5.%20Burnout)


---

### References:

[^1]: ["The Six Phases of Production — TheatreArtLife"](https://www.theatreartlife.com/management/the-six-phases-of-production/) - Highlights the collaborative and high-stakes nature of theatre production.
[^2]: ["The FINAL Big Freelancer Survey launches TODAY! - ABTT"](https://www.abtt.org.uk/the-final-big-freelancer-survey-launches-today/) - Notes that over 70% of the UK theatre workforce are freelancers.
