Ambitious as it might sound, e-tech of 2035 is not that far-fetched. And this calm, yet focused atmosphere described is achieved, not as a product of reckless experimentation, but by more of a careful sculpting of **process**, to allow the technology of the coming days to best help the practitioners of our art form.

The future doesn't need to be dizzying- it can be more like a **relief**.[^1]


---

#### Contents
- [[#The Driver's Seat of Craft|The Driver's Seat of Craft]]
	- [[#The Driver's Seat of Craft#The timeline in brief|The timeline in brief]]
- [[#Developing Our Guidelines|Developing Our Guidelines]]


---

## The Driver's Seat of Craft 

Spatial computing and XR are likely to transform previsualisation across all industries over the next decade - this really just being a great way of digitally planning large projects, like we do today.

Like recent years, we will probably see many tools we use grow and develop- as new players and platforms emerge and compete for our custom. Software development, and crucially, interoperability between different platforms, is becoming easier.

The tech that is being pushed to revolutionise production is really in its early stages, enjoyed by enthusiasts and utilised by specialists. Looking at a Meta Quest 2 today is like seeing a second-generation Palm Pilot in 1997- with more drawbacks of use. This will improve.

The demonstrations you see of 3D previs and early VR, we will look back and wonder how we got by using tools that produced images so limited compared to real life.

From 2025 to 2035, advancements in software, tools for pros, real-time rendering, networking, data infrastructure, and communications, seem poised to make spatial computing more accessible and powerful.

Using trend reports and statistics as our guide, let's project forwards in time to see what's ahead for spatial technology.

### The timeline in brief

#### 2028
Basic VR and AR tools have improved. So light you forget they're there, much better apps, and greater instances across industry of remote collaboration.
#### 2030
'Mixed reality' will blend digital and physical spaces for global teams, from broadcasting, to manufacturing, to entertainment, with incredible visuals
#### 2035
Fully immersive ways of working will become common, helped by advanced AI agents and next-gen tools.[^1]


## Developing Guidelines

Above is a fairly accurate prediction of how technology will advance in the next decade. We have some say over how that will affect us as professionals, and as an industry at large. The question is how to do we correctly anticipate and prepare for the change that is to come? Here are some positive suggestions:

- Continue studying early test cases of how this technology affects process
- Establish rules, conventions and practices: and ways of working that make the most of the new tools that are on their way
- Make sure these practices optimising for the quality-of-life and freedom of practitioners

Designers, creatives, management and artists must benefit and be empowered by these changes- and early adoption and awareness makes this more likely. Let us make sure that optimised workflows do not lead to improper corners being cut at the expense of great work and positive environment.


## Moving to Conclude the Study

The focus of our concluding articles will be firstly on actions recommendations for each industry stakeholder group. i.e.: 

- What specific departments should look out for, make their voice heard about, and repurpose
- Suggested directions for organisational leads in terms of foundational work, key connections, monetisation, and early R&D allocation
- Important engagements for technical leadership and enthusiast practitioners
- Key industry consensus needed e.g. on standards sharing
- Run-through of appropriacy of different configurations of previs responsibility at different scales of production
- Goals and needs that intrepid vendors might engage with
- Best practices for collaborative creative teams to integrate emerging technology into the creative process



---
References

[^1]: 2035 Tech projections show an increase in network speeds, miniaturization, reduced cost, and crucially, interoperability of the different advanced platforms that are being developed today. Read more in our [Spatial Tech Forecast](Spatial%20Tech%20Forecast.md) appendix.

