As we conclude this report, it's clear that the adoption of production visualization in theatre has the potential to revolutionize the creative process. By systematically exploring existing technologies, adjacent projects, and forward-thinking organizations, we've identified opportunities for growth and innovation.


---

#### Contents
- [[#What we must do|What we must do]]
- [[#The Role of Vendors and Organizations in Driving Innovation|The Role of Vendors and Organizations in Driving Innovation]]
- [[#Signing off|Signing off]]


---


## What we can do

The core ways of integrating and innovating production visualisation in our industry involve: 
- identifying areas that can be improved in our process
- developing plans, standards and practices that directly affect these areas positively

This involves an effort which connects:
- Academic institutions
- Major and minor players in industry: venues, production companies
- Relevant trusts and foundations
- Research projects and funds
- Commercial software vendors
- Existing previsualisation service vendors
- Standards Bodies [^2]
- Technology alliances[^1]

To move forward, we need to:
- Establish relationships between forward-thinking organisations, researchers and vendors to facilitate further coordination of standards and practices, and to calibrate market need.
- This could take the form of informal dialogue, partnerships, or wider consortium or conferencing
- Research, development and trialling can take place to integrate and innovate production visualisation practices across all areas of theatre production


The industry's task is to express a clear need, and the first vendor or product to step up may face risks. However, with heavy investment and next-generation technology, the possibilities for production visualization are vast.

However, the technology must show a clear benefit to current workflows before any production use, to ensure a positive track record. 

## Signing off

As we navigate this new era, we must balance the risks and opportunities. In the past year to date (2025), strikes have taken place in the entertainment industry due to improper handling of emerging technology. By working together to establish standards and alliances, we can create a better future for theatre production.

This report aims to serve as a living repository of knowledge for the next decade of learning and documenting production visualisation technology. By sharing best practices, case studies, and industry insights, we hope to empower emerging creatives with the tools and expertise they need, to succeed in this rapidly evolving field. 

We invite industry professionals, vendors, and organisations to contribute to this ongoing conversation and help shape the future of production visualisation. If you would like to submit your story or get in touch, please head to [this page](Contribute%20your%20story%20or%20research.md) or email contact@viz.academy.

Thank you for reading, and we look forward to updates and future collaborations.

---

*Article by [Benjamin Collins](Contribute%20your%20story%20or%20research.md#Benjamin%20Collins) - [Contribute your story or research](Contribute%20your%20story%20or%20research.md)*

[^1]: e.g. OpenUSD Alliance, GDTF Group

[^2]: In the UK, these include UK Theatre and ABTT. Read more in the [Standardisation in Theatre](Standardisation%20in%20Theatre.md) appendix
