
We have seen many interesting technologies emerging across industry, many with the direct pressures to do so, many with abundance of funds and pressure to innovate at scale.

It should be noted as well, some platforms, like Unreal Engine, are common across different industries. Large tech providers and platforms are offering similar spatial tech, optimised in different ways. But beyond these products and organisations, we should stay focused on the underlying trends that are enabling them.

If we are to learn anything from these examples, we must first understand our own processes in the Theatre Industry, then moving to identify pain points in process. These process issues can be optimised, removing barriers to the pursuit of creating great art.

Read on for articles in **Section 3: Our Industry As It I**s.

---

## 1. Rules and Conventions of Modern Theatre Production [>]((1.%20Rules%20&%20Conventions%20of%20Modern%20Theatre%20Production.md)

We establish a ground truth of established practices in process. Read on: [1. Rules & Conventions of Modern Theatre Production](1.%20Rules%20&%20Conventions%20of%20Modern%20Theatre%20Production.md)

## 2. Pain points in modern production [>](2.%20Identifying%20pain%20points.md)

We examine modern theatre production to parse out any pain points in process. Read on: [2. Identifying pain points](2.%20Identifying%20pain%20points.md) 

## 3. Proposal [>](4.%20Proposal.md)

With process and pain points established, we have formed a framework to look at a collections of Case Studies of previsualisation for theatre, from early academic study to product releases. Read on: [4. Proposal](4.%20Proposal.md)

---

*Article by [Benjamin Collins](Contribute%20your%20story%20or%20research.md#Benjamin%20Collins) - [Contribute your story or research](Contribute%20your%20story%20or%20research.md)*